# Strongly-typed System F, at last

*Reference file:* [PolyTyped](src/PolyTyped.hs) and [SubstProperties](src/SubstProperties.hs)

Finally, we put *everything* together to develop a strongly-typed AST for System F! As in [Poly](src/Poly.hs), we need to use de Bruijn indices for both term and type variables.  Our approach is to use weakly-typed ASTs for binding at the type-level and strongly-typed ASTs for binding at the term level. In other words, we will keep the same structure of the expression datatype that we saw in [Part II](debruijn2.md).

```haskell
     data Exp :: [Ty] -> Ty -> Type where
```

The difference is that now our types (`Ty`) can contain free type variables and polymorphic binders. 

This part is where we are really "dependently"-typed programming, and you might expect a little [Hasochism](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2503778.2503786) to come into play.

Overall, the good news is that the singletons library means that there is very little duplication in the code. We (mostly) don't have to write our operations multiple times. However, because we are doing functional programming at the type-level, and because the Haskell type-level lacks anonymous functions, there are a few places where the code looks a bit strange. 

The bad news is that Haskell is not a proof assistant. There will be a few places where we have a proof obligation that we cannot satisfy. What to do?

## Singleton types and promotion

This is where singletons library really comes in. If you go back to the [Subst](src/Subst.hs) and [Poly](src/Poly.hs), you'll see that some definitions are surrounded by Template Haskell brackets and calls to the `singletons` library. These definitions are processed by the library to include additional definitions that we can use for dependently-typed programming.

For example, the singletons library defines the `STy` datatype that is the
"singleton" analogue of the `Ty` datatype from [Poly](src/Poly.hs).

This means that in addition to the `Ty` datatype defined in that file:

```haskell
data Ty = IntTy | Ty :-> Ty | VarTy Idx | PolyTy Ty
```

the library also *generates* the following data type declaration for us (we don't have to write it).

```haskell
data STy :: Ty -> Type where
    SIntTy  :: STy IntTy
    (:%->)  :: STy a  -> STy b -> STy (a :-> b)
    SVarTy  :: SIdx i -> STy (VarTy i)
    SPolyTy :: STy a  -> STy (PolyTy a)
```

The `STy` type allows us to "fake" dependent types. For example, the `LamE` constructor can include a type annotation for the bound variable.

```haskell
LamE :: STy t1 -> Exp g t2 -> Exp g (t1 :-> t2)
```

More impressively, the singletons library also generates type-level analogues for the `SubstC` type class and its members using type families. There are two main differences:

  1. Type families must start with a capital letter, so in types, it is  referred to as `Subst` instead of `subst`.
  2. Type families cannot be partially applied, so if we would like to talk about `subst s` instead of `subst s ty`, we need to rely on the defunctionalization symbols generated by singletons, and use `SubstSym1 s` instead.

## Functional programming in types
